---
title: "Timeseries"
date: 2020-03-20
weight: 2
description: >
  Timeseries
---

## DL Timeseries

This research strives to approve that one can study several sets of
sequences or time series of an underlying evolution operator using a
deep learning network. The language of geospatial time series is used
as a common application type, whereas the series can be any sequence,
and the sequences can be in any collection (bag)-not just Euclidean
space-time-as we need sequences labeled in some way, and having
properties consequent of this label (position in abstract space). This
problem has been successfully tackled by deep learning in many ways
and within numerous research fields. The most advanced work is
estimated to be Natural Language processing and transportation
(ride-hailing). The second case, with traffic and the number of people
needing rides, is a geospatial problem with significant constraints
from the spatial locality. As in many problems, the data here is
typically space-time-stamped events. However, these can be converted
into spatial time series by binning in space and time. Comparing deep
learning for such time series with coupled ordinary differential
equations used to describe multi-particle systems motivates the
introduction of an evolution operator that describes the time
dependence of complex systems. With an appropriate training process,
our research interprets deep learning applied to spatial time series
as a particular approach to finding the time evolution operator for
the complex system giving rise to the spatial time series. Whimsically
we view this training process as determining hidden variables that
represent the theory (as in Newton's laws) of the complex system. This
problem is formulated in general and presents an open-source package
FFFFWNPF as a Jupyter notebook for training and inference using either
recurrent neural networks or a variant of the transformer
(multi-headed attention) approach. This assumes an outside data
engineering step that can prepare data to ingest into FFFFWNPF. The
approach, a comparison of transformer and LSTM networks are presented
for time series of Hydrology streamflow, temperature, and
precipitation data collected on 671 catchments from each nation: the
US, the UK, and Chile. This research is intended to explore how
complex systems of different types (different membership linkages) are
described by different types of deep learning operators. Geometric
structure in space and multi-scale behavior in both time and space
will be important. We predict that the current forecasting formulation
will be easily extended to sequence-to-sequence problems.


## Participants

* Eric He <fay5du@virginia.edu> 

## Deliverables

1. TBD

## References

1. TBD

